\documentclass[,doc,floatsintext]{apa6}
\usepackage{lmodern}
\usepackage{amssymb,amsmath}
\usepackage{ifxetex,ifluatex}
\usepackage{fixltx2e} % provides \textsubscript
\ifnum 0\ifxetex 1\fi\ifluatex 1\fi=0 % if pdftex
  \usepackage[T1]{fontenc}
  \usepackage[utf8]{inputenc}
\else % if luatex or xelatex
  \ifxetex
    \usepackage{mathspec}
  \else
    \usepackage{fontspec}
  \fi
  \defaultfontfeatures{Ligatures=TeX,Scale=MatchLowercase}
\fi
% use upquote if available, for straight quotes in verbatim environments
\IfFileExists{upquote.sty}{\usepackage{upquote}}{}
% use microtype if available
\IfFileExists{microtype.sty}{%
\usepackage{microtype}
\UseMicrotypeSet[protrusion]{basicmath} % disable protrusion for tt fonts
}{}
\usepackage{hyperref}
\hypersetup{unicode=true,
            pdftitle={On the locality of vowel harmony over multi-tiered autosegmental representations},
            pdfauthor={Eileen Blum},
            pdfkeywords={keywords},
            pdfborder={0 0 0},
            breaklinks=true}
\urlstyle{same}  % don't use monospace font for urls
\usepackage{graphicx,grffile}
\makeatletter
\def\maxwidth{\ifdim\Gin@nat@width>\linewidth\linewidth\else\Gin@nat@width\fi}
\def\maxheight{\ifdim\Gin@nat@height>\textheight\textheight\else\Gin@nat@height\fi}
\makeatother
% Scale images if necessary, so that they will not overflow the page
% margins by default, and it is still possible to overwrite the defaults
% using explicit options in \includegraphics[width, height, ...]{}
\setkeys{Gin}{width=\maxwidth,height=\maxheight,keepaspectratio}
\IfFileExists{parskip.sty}{%
\usepackage{parskip}
}{% else
\setlength{\parindent}{0pt}
\setlength{\parskip}{6pt plus 2pt minus 1pt}
}
\setlength{\emergencystretch}{3em}  % prevent overfull lines
\providecommand{\tightlist}{%
  \setlength{\itemsep}{0pt}\setlength{\parskip}{0pt}}
\setcounter{secnumdepth}{5}
% Redefines (sub)paragraphs to behave more like sections
\ifx\paragraph\undefined\else
\let\oldparagraph\paragraph
\renewcommand{\paragraph}[1]{\oldparagraph{#1}\mbox{}}
\fi
\ifx\subparagraph\undefined\else
\let\oldsubparagraph\subparagraph
\renewcommand{\subparagraph}[1]{\oldsubparagraph{#1}\mbox{}}
\fi

%%% Use protect on footnotes to avoid problems with footnotes in titles
\let\rmarkdownfootnote\footnote%
\def\footnote{\protect\rmarkdownfootnote}

%%% Change title format to be more compact
\usepackage{titling}

% Create subtitle command for use in maketitle
\newcommand{\subtitle}[1]{
  \posttitle{
    \begin{center}\large#1\end{center}
    }
}

\setlength{\droptitle}{-2em}
  \title{On the locality of vowel harmony over multi-tiered autosegmental
representations}
  \pretitle{\vspace{\droptitle}\centering\huge}
  \posttitle{\par}
  \author{Eileen Blum\textsuperscript{1}}
  \preauthor{\centering\large\emph}
  \postauthor{\par}
  \date{}
  \predate{}\postdate{}

\shorttitle{Locality of vh over multi-tiered ARs}
\authornote{

Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Eileen Blum, 18 Seminary Place, New Brunswick, NJ 08901. E-mail: eileen.blum@rutgers.edu}
\affiliation{
\vspace{0.5cm}
\textsuperscript{1} Rutgers University}
\keywords{keywords\newline\indent Word count: X}
\usepackage{csquotes}
\usepackage{upgreek}
\captionsetup{font=singlespacing,justification=justified}

\usepackage{longtable}
\usepackage{lscape}
\usepackage{multirow}
\usepackage{tabularx}
\usepackage[flushleft]{threeparttable}
\usepackage{threeparttablex}

\newenvironment{lltable}{\begin{landscape}\begin{center}\begin{ThreePartTable}}{\end{ThreePartTable}\end{center}\end{landscape}}

\makeatletter
\newcommand\LastLTentrywidth{1em}
\newlength\longtablewidth
\setlength{\longtablewidth}{1in}
\newcommand{\getlongtablewidth}{\begingroup \ifcsname LT@\roman{LT@tables}\endcsname \global\longtablewidth=0pt \renewcommand{\LT@entry}[2]{\global\advance\longtablewidth by ##2\relax\gdef\LastLTentrywidth{##2}}\@nameuse{LT@\roman{LT@tables}} \fi \endgroup}


\usepackage{tipa}
\usepackage{gb4e}
\noautomath
\usepackage{tikz}
\usetikzlibrary{matrix}
\tikzset{marked/.style={draw=none, fill=none}}
\usepackage{mathptmx}
\usepackage{moresize}
\setlength{\parindent}{2em}

\usepackage{amsthm}
\newtheorem{theorem}{Theorem}[section]
\newtheorem{lemma}{Lemma}[section]
\theoremstyle{definition}
\newtheorem{definition}{Definition}[section]
\newtheorem{corollary}{Corollary}[section]
\newtheorem{proposition}{Proposition}[section]
\theoremstyle{definition}
\newtheorem{example}{Example}[section]
\theoremstyle{definition}
\newtheorem{exercise}{Exercise}[section]
\theoremstyle{remark}
\newtheorem*{remark}{Remark}
\newtheorem*{solution}{Solution}
\begin{document}
\maketitle

\section{Introduction}\label{introduction}

This qualifying paper aims to investigate the locality of vowel harmony
patterns over autosegmental representations (ARs) using Jardine (2017)'s
forbidden substructure constraints (FSCs) over ARs. The investigation
will provide a well-defined, computationally motivated theory of
well-formedness in vowel harmony. Jardine (2017) developed a theory of
tonal well-formedness and determined that tone patterns are
fundamentally local over two-tiered ARs. Investigating the locality of
vowel harmony patterns will determine the expressive power of
multi-tiered ARs and allows for a theory of well-formedness that makes
accurate typological predictions.

A goal shared by all of generative phonology is to distinguish attested
patterns from logically possible, but unattested ones. A theory of
well-formedness in vowel harmony that accomplishes this goal must be
both expressive enough to explain the attested typology of vowel harmony
patterns and restrictive enough to exclude the logically possible
unattested vowel harmony patterns. This qualifying paper will adopt a
formal language theory approach that provides explicit ways of
determining the expressivity and restrictiveness of phonological
patterns.

\subsection{The formal language theory
approach}\label{the-formal-language-theory-approach}

The goal of distinguishing attested phonological patterns from possible
unattested patterns is currently being investigated using formal
language theory to determine the expressive power required to compute
phonological patterns in general. The Chomsky hierarchy, in
(\ref{chomsky.hierarchy}), classifies stringsets in terms of the
relative expressivity of the grammars needed to generate them. Each
class that is lower on the hierarchy is also a proper subset of the
class above it.

\begin{exe}
\ex{The Chomsky Hierarchy:}\label{chomsky.hierarchy} \\ 
Finite $\subsetneq$ Regular $\subsetneq$ Context-Free $\subsetneq$ Context-Sensitive $\subsetneq$ Computably Enumerable
\end{exe}

A significant body of work in computational phonology shows that
phonological generalizations are properly contained within the regular
class of stringsets (Heinz \& Idsardi, 2013). Recent work has further
established a subregular hierarchy of stringset classes, i.e.~star-free
(SF) and weaker classes (Heinz, Rawal, \& Tanner, 2011; Rogers \&
Pullum, 2011; Rogers et al., 2013). A generative phonlogical theory must
be expressive enough to predict the regular patterns and restrictive
enough to rule out patterns that fall into a larger class, such as
context-free. The classifications of stringsets and ARs in this manner
are not directly comparable, but Jardine (2018; following Jardine and
Heinz, 2015) provides a method for comparing the expressivity of the
grammars that generate them. Jardine (2018) establishes a sub-SF class
of \enquote{forbidden k-factor grammars} over ARs,
ASL\textsuperscript{g}, that is expressive enough to capture a range of
attested tone patterns (ASL\textsuperscript{g\textsubscript{T}}). The
ASL\textsuperscript{g\textsubscript{T}} class includes patterns that
would also fall within three different subregular stringset classes:
strictly local (SL), tier-based strictly local (TSL), and strictly
piecewise (SP). The goal of this qualifying paper is to determine
whether or not the typology of vowel harmony patterns must be captured
by a class of grammars, using ARs with more than two tiers, that is more
expressive than the ASL\textsuperscript{g\textsubscript{T}} class.

Patterns represented with multi-tiered ARs demonstrate whether or not
enriching the representation necessarily increases the expressivity of a
grammar. Representations of vowel harmony refer to subsegmental
features, which will be represented using multiple featural tiers, such
that each feature occupies a separate tier that is associated to a vowel
on the segmental tier (following Clements, 1976; McCarthy, 1988). Such
ARs include at least one additional tier compared with the ARs of tone
patterns, which utilize only two tiers (Jardine, 2016, 2017, 2018). This
qualifying paper will determine whether or not enriching ARs in this way
increases the expressivity of a grammar such that it falls outside of
the previously established ASL\textsuperscript{g\textsubscript{T}}
class. Four aspects of multi-tiered ARs of vowel harmony are
investigated: the complexity of vowel harmony patterns with neutral
vowels in Akan and Finnish, and generalizations that include domain
information like in Turkish, the locality of an asymmetry between
harmony triggers and undergoers in Baiyina Oroquen (Walker, 2014a), and
whether or not multi-tiered ARs predict the generation of an unattested
pattern: \enquote{sour grapes} (McCarthy, 2011; Padgett, 1995; Walker,
2010). Each of these investigations will provide additional evidence of
the expressive power needed for a grammar to generate vowel harmony
patterns.

Vowel harmony can be viewed either as an input-output map or as a
phonotactic \enquote{cooccurrence restriction upon the vowels that may
occur in a word} (Clements, 1976). A hierarchy that classifies sets of
ARs, based on the Chomsky and related subregular hierarchies, differs
significantly from a parallel hierarchy for sets of pairs of ARs, such
as in a transformation (or map) from underlying to surface form.
Previous analyses use ARs to describe vowel harmony patterns as the
spreading of a vowel feature from one vowel throughout the word until it
is blocked (Clements, 1976; Goldsmith, 1976; McCarthy, 1988; Padgett,
2002; Sagey, 1986; vanderHulst, 2017; Walker, 2010, 2014b). Clements
(1976)'s well-formedness condition motivates feature spreading in order
to ensure that all elements on one tier of an AR are connected via an
association relation to some element on another tier of the same AR. The
result is an AR in which all elements on one tier are associated to some
element on another tier. A majority of scholars have thus viewed vowel
harmony as mapping an input with a vowel feature associated to one vowel
onto an output where that same feature is associated to multiple vowels.

This qualifying paper constitutes the first in-depth formal language
theoretic study of vowel harmony as a phonotactic restriction rather
than an input-output map. ARs within the Chomsky-based hierarchy cannot
be compared with sets of pairs of ARs within a separate hierarchy. In
order to compare vowel harmony with other patterns classified within the
subregular hierarchy of ARs this qualifying paper will be taking a
slightly different approach than has been taken before by evaluating
only the restrictions on output substructures. While vowel harmony has
been considered a derivational process, this paper will aim to determine
the locality of only the surface restrictions on vowel harmony patterns
over ARs. The harmonizing ARs that will be examined contain at least one
feature that is associated to more than one vowel, as it would be on the
surface. Ignoring input structures in this way allows for the
classification of vowel harmony within the sub-SF hierarchy of patterns,
which allows for the comparison of vowel harmony with other phonological
patterns that have been classified on the same hierarchy, such as tone
in Jardine (2018).

\subsection{Motivating Autosegmental Representations
(ARs)}\label{motivating-autosegmental-representations-ars}

This qualifying paper will determine the locality of surface
restrictions on vowel harmony patterns over multi-tiered ARs by
investigating whether they can be captured using Jardine (2017)'s
\enquote{forbidden substructure constraints}(FSCs). FSCs are defined as
surface markedness constraints (OT; Prince \& Smolensky, 1993, 2004),
\enquote{which ban pieces of autosegmental representations} (Jardine,
2017, p. 1). FSCs serve as a type of phonotactic restriction such that
\enquote{well-formedness is based on contiguous structures of a specific
size} (Jardine, 2017, p. 3). One can use FSCs as a definition of
locality because they refer to elements within a structure that are
connected by either an ordering or association relation. A phonological
pattern is thus local if it can be described with FSCs because it can be
captured by referring to a subset of the elements within structures and
their connections. Jardine (2017) uses FSCs to show that attested tone
patterns are local in this way.

\subsubsection{Multi-tiered ARs}\label{multi-tiered-ars}

Autosegmental representations (ARs) of tonal patterns generally consist
of two tiers: the TBU and segmental tiers (Goldsmith, 1976; Jardine,
2016, 2017), but an open question that remains is: From a formal
perspective, what is the range of patterns that can be represented using
more than two autosegmental tiers? This paper investigates the
expressive power needed to represent one such set of patterns. Vowel
harmony patterns refer to subsegmental features, which will be
represented using multiple featural tiers; each feature occupies a
separate tier that is associated to a vowel on the segmental tier
(following Clements, 1976; McCarthy, 1988). For example, assuming binary
features, vowel features like {[}\(\pm\) back{]}, {[}\(\pm\) high{]},
etc. are represented on separate tiers and associated to a vowel on the
segmental tier, as in (\ref{fsc.ex}). Association relations are
represented by straight lines that connect elements (segments and
features) on different tiers. Where a tier consists of multiple
elements, the successor ordering relation between elements on that tier
is represented by arrows.

\begin{exe}
\ex \label{fsc.ex}
  \begin{tikzpicture}[baseline=(current bounding box.north)]
  \matrix [matrix of nodes,
          row sep=1em, 
          nodes={text height=1em, text depth=0.5em}] {
|(h)| $\pm$ high\\
|(v)| V         \\
|(b)| $\pm$ back\\
  };
   \draw (h.south) -- (v.north);
   \draw (v.south) -- (b.north);
  \end{tikzpicture}
\end{exe}

The goal for this project is to extend the work of Jardine (2017) to
determine whether vowel harmony patterns are local over ARs with more
than two tiers, as in (\ref{fsc.ex}). This qualifying paper evaluates
whether or not the restrictions on attested vowel harmony patterns can
be captured using FSCs that contain elements of more than one feature
tier.

\subsubsection{Representational
assumptions}\label{representational-assumptions}

Use of ARs requires discussion of at least some of the basic
representational assumptions held throughout this paper. The basic
assumptions are taken from Clements (1976)'s Well-Formedness Condition,
which includes stipulations of \emph{Full Specification} (FS), the
\emph{No Crossing Constraint} (NCC) (Goldsmith, 1976; Sagey, 1986), and
the \emph{Obligatory Contour Principle} (OCP) (Leben, 1973). Examples of
structures that violate each of these assumptions are shown in
(\ref{akan.ex2})-(\ref{akan.ex4}) below.

\begin{exe}
\ex \label{akan.ex2} Violates FS
  \begin{tikzpicture}[baseline=(current bounding box.north)]
  \matrix [matrix of nodes, row sep=2.5ex, column sep=2.25ex, nodes={text height=1em, text depth=0.5em}] 
  {
* & |(b)| -ATR & \\
  & |(d)| V    & |(e)| V \\
  & |(f)| -low & \\
  };
  \draw (b.south) -- (d.north);
  \draw (d.south) -- (f.north);
  \draw[thick,black,->] (d) -- (e);
  \draw foreach \x in {d, e} {(\x.south) -- (f.north)};
  \end{tikzpicture}
\end{exe}

\begin{exe}
\ex \label{akan.ex3} Violates NCC
  \begin{tikzpicture}[baseline=(current bounding box.north)]
  \matrix [matrix of nodes, row sep=2.5ex, column sep=2.25ex, nodes={text height=1em, text depth=0.5em}] 
  {
* & |(a)| +ATR & |(b)| -ATR \\
  & |(c)| V    & |(d)| V \\
  & |(e)| -low &  \\
  };
  \draw (a.south) -- (d.north);
  \draw (b.south) -- (c.north);
  \draw[thick,black,->] (a) -- (b);
  \draw[thick,black,->] (c) -- (d);
  \draw foreach \x in {c, d} {(\x.south) -- (e.north)};
  \end{tikzpicture}
\end{exe}

\begin{exe}
\ex \label{akan.ex4} Violates OCP
  \begin{tikzpicture}[baseline=(current bounding box.north)]
  \matrix [matrix of nodes, row sep=2.5ex, column sep=2.25ex, nodes={text height=1em, text depth=0.5em}] 
  {
* & |(a)| -ATR & |(b)| -ATR \\
  & |(c)| V    & |(d)| V \\
  & |(e)| -low & |(f)| -low \\
  };
  \draw (a.south) -- (c.north);
  \draw (b.south) -- (d.north);
  \draw (c.south) -- (e.north);
  \draw (d.south) -- (f.north);
  \draw[thick,black,->] (a) -- (b);
  \draw[thick,black,->] (c) -- (d);
  \draw[thick,black,->] (e) -- (f);
  \end{tikzpicture}
\end{exe}

First, FS means that each featural element must be associated with at
least one vowel on the segmental tier and each vowel on the segmental
tier must be associated with at least one element on a featural tier. FS
crucially allows vowels to be associated with multiple featural tiers as
is necessary for each vowel feature to occupy its own tier. The
hypothetical representation in (\ref{akan.ex2}) straighforwardly
violates FS because there is a vowel that is not associated to any
feature on the ATR tier. While both vowels are associated to a single
-low feature, the second vowel is not associated to any feature on the
ATR tier. Since vowel harmony patterns will be analyzed, it will be
assumed that consonants cannot be associated to vowel features and that
FS and vowel harmony in general ignore consonantal elements on the
segmental tier.

Second, the NCC states that association lines between the segmental tier
and a feature tier never cross. Odden (1994) adds that the NCC can only
evaluate the association between the segmental and one featural tier at
a time. The representation in (\ref{akan.ex3}) violates the NCC because
+ATR precedes -ATR, but is associated to a vowel that is preceded by a
vowel associated to -ATR; this configuration creates visually crossed
association lines.

A notable effect of FS along with the NCC is that they prevent what have
been called gapped structures (Archangeli \& Pulleyblank, 1994; Ringen
\& Vago, 1998). A gapped structure is one in which a feature appears to
have skipped over a vowel that it could potentially be associated to. FS
would prevent gapped structures in which the \enquote{skipped} vowel is
not associated to anything on that particular feature's tier. The NCC
would prevent gapped structures in which the surrounding two vowels are
associated to the same feature and the \enquote{skipped} vowel is
associated to a different feature on the same tier.

Lastly, the OCP stipulates that adjacent featural elements must be
distinct. The representation in (\ref{akan.ex4}) violates the OCP
because on both the ATR and low feature tiers there are two identical
adjacent features, -ATR and -low respectively. The OCP in conjunction
with FS results in representations where multiple adjacent vowels are
associated to a single feature rather than having multiple adjacent
iterations of the same feature each associated to a single vowel. An
example representation of an Akan word that satisfies all of the AR
properties discussed here is shown in (\ref{akan.ex}).

Both the NCC and the OCP have also been derived via a concatenation
operation (\(\circ\)) that merges autosegmental \enquote{graph
primitives}(Jardine \& Heinz, 2015, p. 1). An autosegmental graph
primitive consists of an element on the segmental tier, the elements on
each feature tier and the associations between the featural and
segmental tiers. The concatenation operation combines a finite set of
adjacent graph primitives to generate a fully specified AR. For example,
the AR in (\ref{akan.ex}) is derived from the set of graph primitives in
(\ref{concat.ex}). Each primitive in (\ref{concat.ex}) is concatenated
with a single adjacent primitive. If two adjacent primitives share an
identical feature those two features are merged into one feature with
two associations, as in (\ref{akan.ex}). The merging of identical
adjacent features essentially prevents surface ARs from having multiple
iterations of a feature and crossed associations, thus satisfying both
the OCP and the NCC. However, if two segmental elements are associated
to the exact same feature and a different element intervenes then both
iterations of that feature will occur in the surface AR because only
adjacent primitive elements are concatenated and can thus be merged.
This qualifying paper will show that an intervening element can be a
vowel associated to the same feature with a different value or a domain
boundary. It will further show that a domain boundary primitive may
include that boundary on both segmental and feature tiers.

\begin{exe}
\ex \label{concat.ex} Concatenation of adjacent autosegmental graph primitives \\
  \begin{tikzpicture}[baseline=(current bounding box.north)]
  \matrix [matrix of nodes, row sep=2.5ex, column sep=2.25ex, nodes={text height=1em, text depth=0.5em}] 
  {
  &                                     & |(a)| -ATR &                                     & |(b)| -ATR \\
t & \node {}; \draw(0, 0) circle (3pt); & |(1)| i    & \node {}; \draw(0, 0) circle (3pt); & |(2)| e \\
  &                                     & |(c)| -low &                                     & |(d)| -low \\
  };
  \draw (a.south) -- (1.north);
  \draw (1.south) -- (c.north);
  \draw (b.south) -- (2.north);
  \draw (2.south) -- (d.north);
  \end{tikzpicture}
\end{exe}\newpage

\begin{exe}
\ex \label{akan.ex} Satisfies FS, NCC, and OCP \\
  \begin{tikzpicture}[baseline=(current bounding box.north)]
  \matrix [matrix of nodes, row sep=2.5ex, column sep=2.25ex, nodes={text height=1em, text depth=0.5em}] 
  {
  &            & |(b)| -ATR & \\
  & |(c)| t    & |(d)| i    & |(e)| e \\
  &            & |(f)| -low & \\
  };
  \draw foreach \x in {d, e} {(b.south) -- (\x.north)};
  \draw foreach \x in {d, e} {(\x.south) -- (f.north)};
  \draw[thick,black,->] (c) -- (d);
  \draw[thick,black,->] (d) -- (e);
  \end{tikzpicture}
\end{exe}

Again, the initial consonant in (\ref{akan.ex}) cannot be associated to
a vowel feature so, while it is ordered with respect to the vowels, FS
does not require the consonant to be associated to any element on either
feature tier. The AR of \emph{tie} satisfies FS because each vowel is
associated to a feature on each of the featural tiers and all features
are associated to at least one vowel. The AR of \emph{tie} also
satisfies both the NCC and the OCP because there is only one of each
feature. The features are represented on separate tiers so association
lines cannot cross and there is nothing else on those tiers that could
violate the OCP. In addition, (\ref{akan.ex2})-(\ref{akan.ex})
illustrate that, unlike the usual notation, this paper will be adding a
representation of the successor ordering relation on each tier using
arrows.

\section{Neutral vowels}\label{neutral-vowels}

In languages that exhibit vowel harmony patterns, vowels are described
as either undergoing harmony or remaining neutral. Traditional accounts
of vowel harmony have identified two categories of neutral vowels:
blocking and transparent (vanderHulst \& Smith, 1986). A vowel is said
to block harmony when the vowels on either side do not have to share the
same feature. A vowel is said to be transparent when the vowels around
it have the same feature, but the transparent vowel does not share that
feature. In other words, harmony appears to skip over transparent
vowels.

\subsection{Blocking vowels}\label{blocking-vowels}

An example of vowels that block harmony is found with ATR harmony in
Akan (Clements, 1976). The Akan vowel inventory, in Table
\ref{akan_vowels}, consists of ten vowels with two main featural
distinctions: \(\pm\) ATR and \(\pm\) low. There are two +low vowels,
{[}\textipa{3}{]} and {[}a{]}, +ATR and -ATR, respectively. All other
vowels are considered -low and distinguished by ATR such that the +ATR
vowels are {[}i, e, u, o{]} and the -ATR vowels are
{[}\textipa{I, E, U, O}{]}.

\begin{table}[h]
  \caption{Akan Vowels}
  \begin{tabular}{c|c|c}
       & +ATR        & -ATR       \\\hline\hline
  -low & i           & \textipa{I}\\ \cline{2-3}
       & u           & \textipa{U}\\ \cline{2-3}
       & e           & \textipa{E}\\ \cline{2-3}
       & o           & \textipa{O}\\\hline
  +low & \textipa{3} & a\\\hline
  \end{tabular}
  \label{akan_vowels}
\end{table}

The harmony generalization is that if a word contains a sequence of -low
vowels, then those vowels will also share the same ATR feature
(Clements, 1976). For example, the words in (\ref{akan_-low}) contain
only -low vowels, which are also all either +ATR or -ATR.

\begin{exe}
\ex{-low vowels share an ATR feature value}\label{akan_-low}
\begin{xlist}
  \ex tie `listen'
  \ex obejii `he came and removed it'
  \ex \textipa{O}b\textipa{E}j\textipa{E}\textipa{I}  `he came and did it'
  \ex wubenum\textraiseglotstop `you will suck it'
  \ex w\textipa{U}b\textipa{E}n\textipa{U}m\textraiseglotstop `you will drink it'
  \end{xlist}
\end{exe}

The surface requirement that adjacent -low vowels share the same ATR
feature can also be written as a FSC, which forbids two adjacent vowels
associated to the same -low feature from being associated to different
ATR features, as in (\ref{fsc.akana}). The ordering relation on the ATR
tier in (\ref{fsc.akana}) is omitted because the + or - values of the
two ATR features are irrelevant for this constraint, as long as they
differ. The ordering relation on the segmental tier of this FSC is also
omitted and the reason will be made clear by the example in
(\ref{akan.obeijii}).

\begin{exe}
\ex \label{fsc.akana}
  \begin{tikzpicture}[baseline=(current bounding box.north)]
  \matrix [matrix of nodes, row sep=2.5ex, column sep=2.25ex, nodes={text height=1em, text depth=0.5em}] 
  {
* & |(a)| +ATR & |(f)| -ATR \\
  & |(c)| V    & |(h)| V \\
  & |(e)| -low &  \\
  };
  \draw (a.south) -- (c.north);
  \draw (f.south) -- (h.north);
  \draw foreach \x in {c, h} {(\x.south) -- (e.north)};
  \end{tikzpicture}
\end{exe}

\begin{exe}
\ex{[obejii] `he came and removed it'}\label{akan.obeijii} \\
  \begin{tikzpicture}[baseline=(current bounding box.north)]
  \matrix [matrix of nodes, row sep=4ex, column sep=2.25ex, nodes={text height=1em, text depth=0.5em}] 
  {
(a) & |(a)| +ATR  &         &         &         &         &         & (b) * & |[red](i)|  \textbf{+ATR}  &         &         &         & |[red](j)| \textbf{-ATR}    & \\
    & |(b)| o     & |(c)| b & |(d)| e & |(e)| j & |(f)| i & |(g)| i &       & |(k)| o     & |(l)| b & |[red](m)| \textbf{e} & |(n)| j & |[red](o)| \textbf{\textipa{I}} & |(p)| \textipa{I} \\
    & |(h)| -low  &         &         &         &         &         &       & |[red](q)| \textbf{-low} & \\
  };
  \draw foreach \x in {b, d, f, g} {(a.south) -- (\x.north)};
  \draw foreach \x in {b, d, f, g} {(\x.south) -- (h.north)};
  \draw (i.south) -- (k.north);
  \draw[red,thick] (i.south) -- (m.north);
  \draw[red,thick] (j.south) -- (o.north);
  \draw (j.south) -- (p.north);
  \draw foreach \x in {k, p} {(\x.south) -- (q.north)};
  \draw[red,thick] foreach \x in {m, o} {(\x.south) -- (q.north)};
  \draw[black,->] (b) -- (c);
  \draw[black,->] (c) -- (d);
  \draw[black,->] (d) -- (e);
  \draw[black,->] (e) -- (f);
  \draw[black,->] (f) -- (g);
  \draw[black,->] (i) -- (j);
  \draw[black,->] (k) -- (l);
  \draw[black,->] (l) -- (m);
  \draw[black,->] (m) -- (n);
  \draw[black,->] (n) -- (o);
  \draw[black,->] (o) -- (p);
  \end{tikzpicture}
\end{exe}

The AR for the grammatical Akan word {[}obeijii{]} \enquote{he came and
removed it} is shown in (\ref{akan.obeijii}a). Here a single +ATR and a
single -low feature are each associated to each vowel within the word,
demonstrating full ATR and low harmony. On the other hand, the
hypothetical Akan word, {[}obej\textipa{II}{]}, represented in
(\ref{akan.obeijii}b) is ungrammatical because it demonstrates full -low
harmony, but does not demonstrate full ATR harmony; so, the AR in
(\ref{akan.obeijii}b) contains the forbidden structure of
(\ref{fsc.akana}), shown in bold and red.

However, in traditional vowel harmony terms the presence of a +low vowel
blocks the rightward spread of ATR, some examples are shown in
(\ref{akan_+low}). Translating this to the static surface
representations assumed here, two -low vowels must be associated to the
same ATR feature, but if a +low vowel intervenes they can be associated
to different ATR features. The representation of (\ref{akan_+low}a)
exemplifies this pattern and is shown in (\ref{ex.akan+low}).

\begin{exe}
  \ex{Vowels on either side of +low can have different ATR features}\label{akan_+low}
  \begin{xlist}
    \ex p\textipa{I}r\textipa{3}ko  `pig'
    \ex obisa\textipa{I} `he asked'
    \ex m\textipa{I}k\textipa{O}k\textipa{3}ri  `I go and weight it'
    \ex okog\textsuperscript{w}ar\textipa{I}\textraiseglotstop `he goes and washes'
  \end{xlist}
\end{exe}

\begin{exe}
\ex{[p\textipa{I}r\textipa{3}ko] `pig'}\label{ex.akan+low} \\
\begin{tikzpicture}[baseline=(current bounding box.north)]
  \matrix [matrix of nodes, 
          row sep=2.5ex, column sep=2.25ex,
          nodes={text height=1em, text depth=0.5em}] 
  {
        & |(a)| -ATR        &         &                   &         & |(b)| +ATR\\
|(c)| p & |(d)| \textipa{I} & |(e)| r & |(f)| \textipa{3} & |(g)| k & |(h)| o\\
        & |(i)| -low        &         & |(j)| +low        &         & |(k)| -low\\
  };
  \draw foreach \x in {d, f} {(a.south) -- (\x.north)};
  \draw (b.south) -- (h.north);
  \draw (d.south) -- (i.north);
  \draw (f.south) -- (j.north);
  \draw (h.south) -- (k.north);
  \draw[black,->] (a) -- (b);
  \draw[black,->] (c) -- (d);
  \draw[black,->] (d) -- (e);
  \draw[black,->] (e) -- (f);
  \draw[black,->] (f) -- (g);
  \draw[black,->] (g) -- (h);
  \draw[black,->] (i) -- (j);
  \draw[black,->] (j) -- (k);
  \end{tikzpicture}
\end{exe}

\noindent Crucially, the AR in (\ref{ex.akan+low}) does not contain the
FSC from (\ref{fsc.akana}). While the AR for {[}p\textipa{Ir3}ko{]}
\enquote{pig} does contain two vowels associated to a -low feature and
two different ATR features, they are each separately concatenated to the
intervening {[}\textipa{3}{]} vowel, which is associated to a +low
feature. So, the surrounding vowels are associated to two separate -low
features on the surface and thus the AR satisfies FS and the NCC.
Because the forbidden structure is not present {[}p\textipa{Ir3}ko{]}
\enquote{pig} is grammatical.

In summary, the vowel harmony pattern with blocking vowels in Akan can
be captured using the FSC in (\ref{fsc.akana}), which does not refer to
adjacency on any tier. Akan vowel harmony could thus be considered local
because the FSC that captures the pattern need only refer to the
associations between vowels and features. The next section outlines a
vowel harmony pattern with the other type of neutral vowel, called
transparent.

\subsection{Transparent vowels}\label{transparent-vowels}

Finnish provides an example of backness harmony with four transparent
vowels. The Finnish vowel inventory in Table \ref{finnish_vowels}
consists of 16 vowels with contrastive length and three main featural
distinctions: \(\pm\) back, \(\pm\) low, and \(\pm\) round (Ringen \&
Heinamaki, 1999; Välimaa-Blum, 1986). The four vowels transparent to
backness harmony, \textipa{[i, i:, e, e:]}, are all {[}-back, -round,
-low{]}. Of the harmonizing vowels
\textipa{[y, y:, u, u:, \o, \o:, o, o:]} are all +round and -low while
\textipa{[\ae, \ae:, A, A:]} are all +low and -round. The +back vowels
are \textipa{[u, u:, o, o:, A, A:]} and the -back vowels are
\textipa{[i, i:, e, e:, y, y:, \o, \o:, \ae, \ae:]}. The difference
between harmonizing and transparent Finnish vowels is characterized by
low and round feature values. Transparent vowels are all {[}-low,
-round{]} and thus harmonizing vowels have a positive value for the low
and/or round feature.

\begin{table}[h]
  \caption{Finnish Vowels}
  \begin{tabular}{c|c|c|c|c}
       & -round          & \multicolumn{2}{l|}{+round} &  \\\hline\hline
  -low & \textipa{i, i:} & \textipa{y, y:}             & \textipa{u, u:} \\\cline{2-4}
       & \textipa{e, e:} & \textipa{\o, \o:}           & \textipa{o, o:} \\\hline\cline{3-5}
  +low &                 & \textipa{\ae, \ae:}         & \textipa{A, A:} & -round\\\hline\hline
                         & \multicolumn{2}{l|}{-back}  & +back \\\hline
  \end{tabular}
  \label{finnish_vowels}
\end{table}

The Finnish harmony generalization is that all of the harmonizing vowels
in a root will share the same back feature with each other and
harmonizing suffix vowels will share the same back feature with the
harmonizing root-final vowel (Nevins, 2010; Ringen \& Heinamaki, 1999;
vanderHulst, 2017; Välimaa-Blum, 1986). Since the same harmony
generalization holds for both root and suffix vowels the Finnish
generalization can also be stated as two harmonizing vowels must share
the same back feature. For example, the words in
(\ref{finnish_-neutral}) contain only +round or +low vowels, which are
also either all +back or all -back.

\begin{exe}
\ex{harmonizing vowels share a back feature value}\label{finnish_-neutral}
\begin{xlist}
  \ex \textipa{p\o yt\ae} `table'
  \ex \textipa{k\ae nt\ae:} `turn'
  \ex \textipa{tyk\ae t\ae} `like'
  \ex \textipa{poutA} `fine weather'
  \ex \textipa{murtA:} `break'
  \ex \textipa{kokAtA} `cook'
  \end{xlist}
\end{exe}

Transparent vowels, however, do not block or undergo harmony so in the
Finnish words in (\ref{finnish_trans}) +back harmony appears to skip
over the {[}-back, -round, -low{]} vowels \textipa{[i, i:, e, e:]}. The
novel contribution of the current analysis is to treat transparent
vowels in the same way as harmonizing vowels; the FSCs posited in this
section are able to generate the Finnish pattern without
underspecification of back features.

\begin{exe}
\ex{back harmony skips over transparent vowels}\label{finnish_trans}
\begin{xlist}
  \ex \textipa{ruvetA} `start'
  \ex \textipa{tuoliA} `chair'
  \ex \textipa{lukeA} `read (inf.)'
  \ex \textipa{kAuneus} `beauty'
  \ex \textipa{nAivius} `naiveness'
  \ex \textipa{kotikAs} `cozy'
  \end{xlist}
\end{exe}

The surface requirement that +round and +low vowels share the same back
feature can also be stated negatively as a constraint that forbids
either a +round or a +low vowel from being associated to a different
preceeding back feature. Together, the four FSCs in (\ref{fsc.finnish})
generate this negative constraint and the Finnish vowel harmony pattern.
The ordering relation on the segmental tier of the FSCs is omitted
because the vowels can have consonants between them, as in
(\ref{finnish.pouta}). The ordering relation on the back tier, however,
is crucial in order to allow transparency of certain -back vowels.

\begin{exe}
\ex \label{fsc.finnish}
  \begin{tikzpicture}[baseline=(current bounding box.north)]
  \matrix [matrix of nodes, row sep={3.45em,between origins}, column sep={2.25em,between origins}, nodes={text height=1em, text depth=0.5em}] 
  {
(a)  & * & |(a)| +back &            & |(b)| -back & & (b) & * & |(1)| +back &  & |(2)| -back  \\
     & &               &            & |(d)| V     & &       &   &             &  & |(6)| V      \\
     & &               & |(e)| +low &             & &       &   &             &  & \\
     & &               &            &             & &       &   &             &  & |(9)| +round \\
(c)  & *          & |(f)| -back & & |(g)| +back & & (d)  & * & |(10)| -back  & & |(11)| +back \\
     &            & |(h)| V     & &             & &      &   & |(12)| V      & & \\
     & |(j)| +low &             & &             & &      &   &               & & \\
     &            &             & &             & &      &   & |(14)| +round & & \\
  };
  \draw (b.south) -- (d.north);
  \draw (d.south) -- (e.north);
  \draw[black,->] (a) -- (b);
  \draw (2.south) -- (6.north);
  \draw (6.south) -- (9.north);
  \draw[black,->] (a) -- (b);
  \draw[black,->] (1) -- (2);
  \draw (f.south) -- (h.north);
  \draw (h.south) -- (j.north);
  \draw[black,->] (f) -- (g);
  \draw (10.south) -- (12.north);
  \draw (12.south) -- (14.north);
  \draw[black,->] (10) -- (11);
  \end{tikzpicture}
\end{exe}

The ARs in (\ref{finnish.pouta}) illustrate how the Finnish FSCs rule
out ungrammatical disharmonic words. The AR for the grammatical Finnish
word \textipa{[poutA]} `fine weather', shown in (\ref{finnish.pouta}a),
contains both a +round and a +low non-initial vowel as well as a single
+back feature, which demonstrates full back harmony. The hypothetical
Finnish word, \textipa{[pout\ae]} in (\ref{finnish.pouta}b), however,
contains the forbidden structure of (\ref{fsc.finnish}a) in bold and
red. In (\ref{finnish.pouta}b) the final vowel does not harmonize with
the penultimate vowel because they are associated to different back
features. \newpage

\begin{exe}
\ex{\textipa{[poutA]} `fine weather'}\label{finnish.pouta} \\
  \begin{tikzpicture}[baseline=(current bounding box.north)]
  \matrix [matrix of nodes, row sep={3.45em,between origins}, column sep={2.25em,between origins}, nodes={text height=1em, text depth=0.5em}] 
  {
(a) &            & |(a)| +back &         &             &                   & & (b) * &               & |[red](n)| \textbf{+back} &                        &         &  |[red](o)| \textbf{-back} \\ 
    & |(b)| p    & |(c)| o     & |(d)| u & |(e)| t    & |(f)| \textipa{A} & &        & |(p)| p       & |(q)| o                   & |(r)| u  & |(s)| t                  & |[red](t)| \textbf{\ae}\\
    & |(l)| -low &             &         & |(m)| +low &                   & &        & |(z)| -low    &                           &                        & |[red](1)| \textbf{+low} & \\
    &              & |(j)| +round  &         &             & |(k)| -round & &       &               & |(x)| +round     &                        &          & |(y)| -round             & \\
  };
  \draw foreach \x in {c, d, f} {(a.south) -- (\x.north)};
  \draw foreach \x in {c, d} {(\x.south) -- (j.north)};
  \draw foreach \x in {c, d} {(\x.south) -- (l.north)};
  \draw (f.south) -- (k.north);
  \draw (f.south) -- (m.north);
  \draw foreach \x in {q, r} {(n.south) -- (\x.north)};
  \draw[thick,red] (o.south) -- (t.north);
  \draw foreach \x in {q, r} {(\x.south) -- (x.north)};
  \draw foreach \x in {q, r} {(\x.south) -- (z.north)};
  \draw (t.south) -- (y.north);
  \draw[thick,red] (t.south) -- (1.north);
  \draw[black,->] (b) -- (c);
  \draw[black,->] (c) -- (d);
  \draw[black,->] (d) -- (e);
  \draw[black,->] (e) -- (f);
  \draw[black,->] (j) -- (k);
  \draw[black,->] (l) -- (m);
  \draw[thick,red,->] (n) -- (o);
  \draw[black,->] (p) -- (q);
  \draw[black,->] (q) -- (r);
  \draw[black,->] (r) -- (s);
  \draw[black,->] (s) -- (t);
  \draw[black,->] (x) -- (y);
  \draw[black,->] (z) -- (1);
  \end{tikzpicture}
\end{exe}

Crucially, the behavior of the transparent vowels with respect to vowel
harmony in Finnish is captured by the two FSCs in (\ref{fsc.finnish})
without reference to underspecification of back features. For example,
the words in (\ref{finnish_trans}) all contain vowels with -back
features that follow +back vowels, but because the -back vowels are also
{[}-low, -round{]} the words are grammatical. The transparent vowels are
associated to all the same features as the harmonizing vowels and their
so-called transparency results from the interaction of the -back
features with -low and -round features, as shown in
(\ref{finnish.ruveta}). Because the Finnish FSCs only forbid
associations to certain back features when vowels are also either +low
or +round, the {[}-back, -low, -round{]} vowels are able to occur
anywhere within a word and do not affect the back feature values of
other vowels.

\begin{exe}
\ex{\textipa{\textipa{[ruvetA]}} `start'}\label{finnish.ruveta} \\
  \begin{tikzpicture}[baseline=(current bounding box.north)]
  \matrix [matrix of nodes, row sep={3.45em,between origins}, column sep={2.25em,between origins}, nodes={text height=1em, text depth=0.5em}] 
  {
(a) &            & |(a)| +back &         & |(b)| -back &            & |(c)| +back       & & (b) * &          & |[red](n)| \textbf{+back}           &          & |[red](o)| \textbf{-back}           &         & |(p)| +back \\ 
    & |(d)| r    & |(e)| u     & |(f)| v & |(g)| e     & |(h)| t    & |(i)| \textipa{A} & &       & |(q)| r & |[red](r)| \textbf{u} & |(s)| v  & |[red](t)| \textbf{y} & |(u)| t & |(v)| \textipa{A}\\
    & |(j)| -low &             &         &             &            & |(k)| +low        & &       &          & |(w)| -low   &                       &          &                           & |(x)| +low & \\
    &            & |(l)| +round &         &            & |(m)| -round &       &           &       &          &              & |[red](y)| \textbf{+round}          &          &                           &            & |(z)| -round \\
  };
  \draw (a.south) -- (e.north);
  \draw (b.south) -- (g.north);
  \draw (c.south) -- (i.north);
  \draw[thick,red] (n.south) -- (r.north);
  \draw[thick,red] (o.south) -- (t.north);
  \draw (p.south) -- (v.north);
  \draw foreach \x in {e, g} {(\x.south) -- (j.north)};
  \draw (e.south) -- (l.north);
  \draw (i.south) -- (k.north);
  \draw foreach \x in {g, i} {(\x.south) -- (m.north)};
  \draw foreach \x in {r, t} {(\x.south) -- (w.north)};
  \draw (r.south) -- (y.north);
  \draw[thick,red] (t.south) -- (y.north);
  \draw foreach \x in {x, z} {(v.south) -- (\x.north)};
  \draw[black,->] (a) -- (b);
  \draw[black,->] (b) -- (c);
  \draw[thick,red,->] (n) -- (o);
  \draw[black,->] (o) -- (p);
  \draw[black,->] (d) --(e);
  \draw[black,->] (e) -- (f);
  \draw[black,->] (f) -- (g);
  \draw[black,->] (g) -- (h);
  \draw[black,->] (h) -- (i);
  \draw[black,->] (q) -- (r);
  \draw[black,->] (r) -- (s);
  \draw[black,->] (s) -- (t);
  \draw[black,->] (t) -- (u);
  \draw[black,->] (u) --(v);
  \draw[black,->] (j) -- (k);
  \draw[black,->] (w) -- (x);
  \draw[black,->] (l) -- (m);
  \draw[black,->] (y) -- (z);
  \end{tikzpicture}
\end{exe}

\noindent The same two FSCs in (\ref{fsc.finnish}) generate Finnish back
harmony with transparent vowels in both roots and suffixes. In addition,
FSCs with a -back succeeded by a +back feature do not generate the
Finnish pattern because the grammatical Finnish words in
(\ref{finnish_trans}) also contain +back harmonizing vowels that follow
the transparent vowels.

In summary, the vowel harmony pattern with transparent vowels in Finnish
can be captured using the two FSCs in (\ref{fsc.finnish}). These FSCs
refer to adjacency on the back tier, which also interacts with both the
round and low feature tiers. Finnish vowel harmony could thus be
considered local because the FSCs that capture the pattern refer to the
associations between vowels and features and the ordering between
features.

\subsection{Spreading via OCP}\label{spreading-via-ocp}

Previous analyses of vowel harmony assumed that all vowel harmony
patterns result from a single assimilation mechanism: feature spreading.
However, in Finnish spreading makes elements at any distance local, but
this locality is not necessarily related to vowel harmony. The analysis
of Finnish provided above demonstrates that spreading creates local
structures on the surface by connecting elements at any distance via the
OCP. If one assumes the surface ARs used here and that they are derived
by the concatenation of primitives, the OCP can hold over any distance.
Identical features are merged so that multiple vowels can be associated
to a single feature and different features on a tier are connected by
adjacency. While spreading does the long-distance work to make surface
ARs local, in the next section it will be shown that spreading is not
necessarily the only possible assimilation mechanism.

\section{Morphologically-conditioned
harmony}\label{morphologically-conditioned-harmony}

\subsection{Turkish}\label{turkish}

Native Turkish words demonstrate two separate harmony patterns: back and
round harmony. In Turkish, a suffix vowel shares its back feature with
the root-final vowel, but it is debated whether or not Turkish also
utilizes back harmony within roots. In addition, a +high suffix vowel
shares its round feature with the root-final vowel. The vowel inventory
of Turkish in Table \ref{turkish_vowels} consists of eight vowels with
three main featural distinctions: \(\pm\) high, \(\pm\) back, \(\pm\)
round. In Turkish the +high -back vowels are {[}i, ü{]}, the +high +back
vowels are \textipa{[1, u]}, the -high -back vowels are {[}e, ö{]}, and
the -high +back vowels are {[}a, o{]}.

\begin{table}[h]
  \caption{Turkish Vowels}
  \begin{tabular}{cc|c|cc|c|c|cc}
        & & \multicolumn{2}{|l}{-back}  &        & \multicolumn{2}{|l}{+back} &             & \\\cline{1-7}\cline{1-7}
  +high & & i                           & ü      &                            & \textipa{1} & u \\\cline{1-7}
  -high & & e                           & ö      &                            & a           & o \\\cline{1-7}\cline{1-7}
        & & -round                      & +round &                            & -round      & +round \\
  \end{tabular}
  \label{turkish_vowels}
\end{table}

The Turkish back harmony generalization is that all suffix vowels share
the same back feature as the root-final vowel and the round harmony
generalization is that a high suffix vowel shares the same round feature
as the root-final vowel (Clements, 1976; Crothers \& Shibatani, 1980;
Nevins, 2010; Padgett, 2002; vanderHulst, 2017). For example, the words
in (\ref{turkish_back}) contain suffix vowels that have the same back
feature as the preceding root-final vowel. In addition, the high suffix
vowels in (\ref{turkish_back}b-e) have the same round feature as the
root-final vowel. Unlike in Finnish, Turkish non-final root vowels and
suffix vowels do not necessarily share the same features on the surface,
which makes it necessary to distinguish morphemes in ARs. Throughout
this section, root and suffix morphemes will be distinguished by their
position relative to a morpheme boundary, i.e.~roots are on the left and
suffixes on the right. In (\ref{turkish_back}), for example, a morpheme
boundary is represented by a large plus sign `\textipa{\LARGE+}'.
\newpage

\begin{exe}
\ex{Suffix vowels share a back feature with root-final vowels}\label{turkish_back} 
\begin{xlist}
  \ex \textipa{ip\LARGE+}ler `rope (Nom.pl)'
  \ex \textipa{köy\LARGE+}\textipa{ün} `village (Gen.sg)'
  \ex \textipa{el\LARGE+}i   `hand (Acc.sg)'
  \ex \textipa{k1z\LARGE+}\textipa{1n} `girl (Gen.sg)'
  \ex \textipa{son\LARGE+}u  `end (Acc.sg)'
  \ex \textipa{pul\LARGE+}lar `stamp (Nom.pl)'
\end{xlist}
\end{exe}

In addition, Turkish consists of grammatical words with disharmonic
roots, as in (\ref{turkish_disharmonic}). For example, a lack of back
harmony within root words prevents root and suffix back harmony
generalizations from being collapsed into a single harmony pattern, as
in Finnish. If back harmony holds only between root-final and suffix
vowels, but not within roots, the back features associated to those
vowels must also be distinguished as either root or suffix features.

\begin{exe}
\ex{Turkish words with disharmonic roots}\label{turkish_disharmonic} 
\begin{xlist}
  \ex butik   `boutique'
  \ex bordür  `edge ornamentation'
  \ex kuvvet  `strength'
  \ex mezat   `auction'
  \ex tatil   `vacation'
\end{xlist}
\end{exe}

The Turkish back harmony pattern can thus be captured by an FSC that
forbids two adjacent back features on either side of a morpheme boundary
from having different values, as in (\ref{fsc.turkishback}). In the FSC
in (\ref{fsc.turkishback}a), the +back vowel and the -back vowel must
also be identifiable as the root and suffix vowels, respectively. The
successor ordering relation on the back tier ensures that the +back
vowel is to the left and the -back vowel is to the right. In addition,
the morpheme boundary must be represented on the back tier in order to
distinguish the root feature from the suffix feature. The same reasoning
holds for the FSC in (\ref{fsc.turkishback}b), but the root-final vowel
is associated to a -back and the suffix vowel is associated to a +back
feature.

\begin{exe}
\ex \label{fsc.turkishback}
  \begin{tikzpicture}[baseline=(current bounding box.north)]
  \matrix [matrix of nodes, row sep={3.45em,between origins}, column sep={3em,between origins}, nodes={text height=1em, text depth=0.5em}] 
  {
(a) * & |(a)| +back & |(b)| \LARGE+ & |(c)| -back & & (b) * & |(1)| -back & |(2)| \LARGE+ & |(3)| +back \\
  };
  \draw[black,->] (a) -- (b);
  \draw[black,->] (b) -- (c);
  \draw[black,->] (1) -- (2);
  \draw[black,->] (2) -- (3);
  \end{tikzpicture}
\end{exe}

\begin{exe}
\ex{[\textipa{ip\LARGE+}ler] `rope (Nom.pl)'}\label{turkish.ipler} \\
  \begin{tikzpicture}[baseline=(current bounding box.north)]
  \matrix [matrix of nodes, row sep={3.45em,between origins}, column sep={2.25em,between origins}, nodes={text height=1em, text depth=0.5em}] 
  {
(a) & |(a)| -back &              & |(3)| \LARGE+ &         & |(2)| -back &         & (b) * & |[red](h)| \textbf{-back} &         & |[red](1)| \textbf{\LARGE+} &         & |[red](i)| \textbf{+back} & \\ 
    & |(b)| i     & |(c)| p      & |(d)| \LARGE+ & |(e)| l & |(f)| e     & |(g)| r &       & |(j)| i     & |(k)| p & |(l)| \LARGE+               & |(m)| l & |(n)| a & |(o)| r \\
  };
  \draw (a.south) -- (b.north);
  \draw (2.south) -- (f.north);
  \draw (h.south) -- (j.north);
  \draw (i.south) -- (n.north);
  \draw[black,->] (a) -- (3);
  \draw[black,->] (3) -- (2);
  \draw[black,->] (b) -- (c);
  \draw[black,->] (c) -- (d);
  \draw[black,->] (d) -- (e);
  \draw[black,->] (e) -- (f);
  \draw[black,->] (f) -- (g);
  \draw[black,->] (j) -- (k);
  \draw[black,->] (k) -- (l);
  \draw[black,->] (l) -- (m);
  \draw[black,->] (m) -- (n);
  \draw[black,->] (n) -- (o);
  \draw[red,thick,->] (h) -- (1);
  \draw[red,thick,->] (1) -- (i);
  \end{tikzpicture}
\end{exe}

\noindent The Turkish word {[}\textipa{ip\LARGE+}ler{]} `rope (Nom.pl)'
illustrates full back harmony, as shown in (\ref{turkish.ipler}a): both
the root and suffix features are -back. The hypothetical word
{[}\textipa{ip\LARGE+}lar{]}, on the other hand, is ungrammatical
because the root and suffix vowels are associated to different back
features and so the AR in (\ref{turkish.ipler}b) contains the forbidden
substructure of (\ref{fsc.turkishback}b) in bold and red.

Turkish round harmony can also be written as an FSC, which forbids a
suffix vowel that is associated to a +high feature from also being
associated to a different round feature from the root-final vowel, as in
(\ref{fsc.turkishround}).

\begin{exe}
\ex \label{fsc.turkishround}
  \begin{tikzpicture}[baseline=(current bounding box.north)]
  \matrix [matrix of nodes, row sep={3.45em,between origins}, column sep={3.10em,between origins}, nodes={text height=1em, text depth=0.5em}] 
  {
(a) *        &               & |(a)| +high  & & & (b) *        &               & |(1)| +high \\
             &               & |(c)| V      & & &              &               & |(3)| V \\
|(d)| +round & |(f)| \LARGE+ & |(e)| -round & & & |(4)| -round & |(5)| \LARGE+ & |(6)| +round \\
  };
  \draw (a.south) -- (c.north);
  \draw (c.south) -- (e.north);
  \draw (1.south) -- (3.north);
  \draw (3.south) -- (6.north);
  \draw[black,->] (d) -- (f);
  \draw[black,->] (f) -- (e);
  \draw[black,->] (4) -- (5);
  \draw[black,->] (5) -- (6);
  \end{tikzpicture}
\end{exe}

\begin{exe}
\ex{[\textipa{köy\LARGE+}ün] `village (Gen.sg)'}\label{turkish.koyun} \\
  \begin{tikzpicture}[baseline=(current bounding box.north)]
  \matrix [matrix of nodes, row sep={3.45em,between origins}, column sep={3.25em,between origins}, nodes={text height=1em, text depth=0.5em}] 
  {
(a)     & |(a)| -high  &         & |(1)| \LARGE+ & |(g)| +high &          & (b) * & |(h)| -high                &         & |(3)| \LARGE+ & |[red](i)| \textbf{+high} & \\
|(b)| k & |(c)| ö      & |(d)| y & |(s)| \LARGE+ & |(e)| ü      & |(f)| n & |(j)| k & |(k)| ö      & |(l)| y & |(m)| \LARGE+              & |[red](n)| \textbf{i} & |(o)| n \\
        & |(p)| +round &         & |(4)| \LARGE+ & |(5)| +round &         &        & |[red](q)| \textbf{+round} &         & |[red](2)| \textbf{\LARGE+} & |[red](r)| \textbf{-round} \\         
  };
  \draw (a.south) -- (c.north);
  \draw (g.south) -- (e.north);
  \draw (c.south) -- (p.north);
  \draw (e.south) -- (5.north);
  \draw (h.south) -- (k.north);
  \draw[red,thick] (i.south) -- (n.north);
  \draw (k.south) -- (q.north);
  \draw[red,thick] (n.south) -- (r.north);
  \draw[black,->] (a) -- (1);
  \draw[black,->] (1) -- (g);
  \draw[black,->] (b) -- (c);
  \draw[black,->] (c) -- (d);
  \draw[black,->] (d) -- (s);
  \draw[black,->] (s) -- (e);
  \draw[black,->] (e) -- (f);
  \draw[black,->] (j) -- (k);
  \draw[black,->] (k) -- (l);
  \draw[black,->] (l) -- (m);
  \draw[black,->] (m) -- (n);
  \draw[black,->] (n) -- (o);
  \draw[red,thick,->] (q) -- (2);
  \draw[red,thick,->] (2) -- (r);
  \draw[black,->] (h) -- (3);
  \draw[black,->] (3) -- (i);
  \draw[black,->] (p) -- (4);
  \draw[black,->] (4) -- (5);
  \end{tikzpicture}
\end{exe}

\noindent The AR for the grammatical Turkish word
{[}\textipa{köy\LARGE+}ün{]} `village (Gen.sg)' shown in
(\ref{turkish.koyun}a) contains a -high root-final vowel and a +high
suffix vowel. Both vowels are associated to a +round feature, which
demonstrates full round harmony. The hypothetical Turkish word
{[}köy-in{]} in (\ref{turkish.koyun}b), on the other hand, contains the
forbidden structure of (\ref{fsc.turkishround}) in bold and red because
it does not demonstrate full round harmony; the +high suffix vowel is
associated to a different round feature than the root-final vowel.

The analysis presented above captures both the Turkish back and round
harmony patterns with FSCs in which morpheme boundaries are represented
on all feature tiers. One critique of such an analsysis could be that
morpheme boundaries can only be represented on the segmental tier and
not on feature tiers. Such an analysis would correctly rule out
disharmonic suffixes, but not disharmonic roots in Turkish. For example,
if the morpheme boundary is removed from the feature tiers, then the
FSCs in (\ref{fsc.turkishback}) would look like those in
(\ref{fsc.turkish.nomorph}).

\begin{exe}
\ex \label{fsc.turkish.nomorph}
  \begin{tikzpicture}[baseline=(current bounding box.north)]
  \matrix [matrix of nodes, row sep={3.45em,between origins}, column sep={3.5em,between origins}, nodes={text height=1em, text depth=0.5em}] 
    {
(a) * & |(a)| +back & |(c)| -back & & (b) * & |(1)| -back & |(3)| +back \\
  };
  \draw[black,->] (a) -- (c);
  \draw[black,->] (1) -- (3);
  \end{tikzpicture}
\end{exe}

On the surface, all Turkish suffix vowels are associated to the same
back feature as root-final vowels and the FSCs in
(\ref{fsc.turkish.nomorph}) forbid any two adjacent back features from
having different values. In a grammatical Turkish word with two suffix
vowels, like
{[}\textipa{k1z\LARGE+}\textipa{lar}\textipa{\LARGE+}\textipa{1n}{]}
`girls (gen.)', both suffix vowels are associated to the same back
feature on the surface, as shown in the AR (\ref{turkish.dishsuf}a). The
word
{[}\textipa{k1z\LARGE+}\textipa{lar}\textipa{\LARGE+}\textipa{1n}{]}
contains the root {[}\textipa{k1z}{]} followed by two suffixes:
{[}lar{]} and {[}\textipa{1n}{]}. The representation of these three
morphemes is derived via concatenation of autosegmental graph primitives
that include consonants, vowels associated to back features, or morpheme
boundaries on the segmental tier, as shown in (\ref{turkish.dprim}). The
grammatical AR in (\ref{turkish.dishsuf}a) thus demonstrates that all
suffix vowels are associated to the same back feature even when multiple
suffixes are present.

\begin{exe}
\ex \label{turkish.dprim} Concatenation of Turkish graph primitives \\
  \begin{tikzpicture}[baseline=(current bounding box.north)]
  \matrix [matrix of nodes, row sep=2.5ex, column sep={2em,between origins}, nodes={text height=1em, text depth=0.5em}]
  {
(a)     &                                     & |(a)| +back       &                                         &         &                                     &                         &                                    &         &                                     & |(b)| +back &                                      &         &                                     &                          &                                      & |(c)| +back       &                                     & \\
|(1)| k & \node {}; \draw(0, 0) circle (3pt); & |(2)| \textipa{1} & \node {}; \draw(0, 0) circle (3pt); & |(3)| z & \node {}; \draw(0, 0) circle (3pt); & |(4)| \textipa{\LARGE+} & \node {}; \draw(0, 0) circle (3pt); & |(5)| l & \node {}; \draw(0, 0) circle (3pt); & |(6)| a     & \node {}; \draw(0, 0) circle (3pt); & |(7)| r & \node {}; \draw(0, 0) circle (3pt); & |(pl)| \textipa{\LARGE+} & \node {}; \draw(0, 0) circle (3pt); & |(8)| \textipa{1} & \node {}; \draw(0, 0) circle (3pt); & |(9)| n \\
  };
  \draw (a.south) -- (2.north);
  \draw (b.south) -- (6.north);
  \draw (c.south) -- (8.north);
  \end{tikzpicture}
\end{exe}

\begin{exe}
\ex \label{turkish.dishsuf}
  \begin{tikzpicture}[baseline=(current bounding box.north)]
  \matrix [matrix of nodes, row sep={3.45em,between origins}, column sep={3.5em,between origins}, nodes={text height=1em, text depth=0.5em}] 
    {
(a) &         & |(a)| +back       &         &               &         &         &         &                  & \\
    & |(1)| k & |(2)| \textipa{1} & |(3)| z & |(4)| \LARGE+ & |(5)| l & |(6)| a & |(7)| r & |(8)| \textipa{1} & |(9)| n \\
(b) & *        & |[red](d)| \textbf{+back}        &          &                &          &            &          &|[red](g)| \textbf{-back} & \\
    & |(10)| k & |(11)| \textipa{1} & |(12)| z & |(13)| \LARGE+ & |(14)| l & |(15)| a                 & |(16)| r & |(17)| i   & |(18)| n \\
(c) & *        & |(h)| +back        &          &                &          & |[red](j)| \textbf{-back} &          &|[red](k)| \textbf{+back} & \\
    & |(19)| k & |(20)| \textipa{1} & |(21)| z & |(22)| \LARGE+ & |(23)| l & |(24)| e                 & |(25)| r & |(26)| \textipa{1}   & |(27)| n \\
  };
  \draw foreach \x in {2, 6, 8} {(a.south) -- (\x.north)};
  \draw foreach \x in {11, 15} {(d.south) -- (\x.north)};
  \draw (g.south) -- (17.north);
  \draw (h.south) -- (20.north);
  \draw (j.south) -- (24.north);
  \draw (k.south) -- (26.north);
  \draw[black,->] (1) -- (2);
  \draw[black,->] (2) -- (3);
  \draw[black,->] (3) -- (4);
  \draw[black,->] (4) -- (5);
  \draw[black,->] (5) -- (6);
  \draw[black,->] (6) -- (7);
  \draw[black,->] (7) -- (8);
  \draw[black,->] (8) -- (9);
  \draw[thick,red,->] (d) -- (g);
  \draw[black,->] (10) -- (11);
  \draw[black,->] (11) -- (12);
  \draw[black,->] (12) -- (13);
  \draw[black,->] (13) -- (14);
  \draw[black,->] (14) -- (15);
  \draw[black,->] (15) -- (16);
  \draw[black,->] (16) -- (17);
  \draw[black,->] (17) -- (18);
  \draw[black,->] (h) -- (j);
  \draw[thick,red,->] (j) -- (k);
  \draw[black,->] (19) -- (20);
  \draw[black,->] (20) -- (21);
  \draw[black,->] (21) -- (22);
  \draw[black,->] (22) -- (23);
  \draw[black,->] (23) -- (24);
  \draw[black,->] (24) -- (25);
  \draw[black,->] (25) -- (26);
  \draw[black,->] (26) -- (27);
  \end{tikzpicture}
\end{exe}

\noindent The ARs in (\ref{turkish.dishsuf}b) and
(\ref{turkish.dishsuf}c), on the other hand, violate the FSCs in
(\ref{fsc.turkish.nomorph}a) and (\ref{fsc.turkish.nomorph}b),
respectively. In (\ref{turkish.dishsuf}b) the suffix vowel closest to
the morpheme boundary is associated to a +back feature that is adjacent
to a -back feature, shown in bold and red. Similarly, in
(\ref{turkish.dishsuf}c) the suffix vowel closest to the morpheme
boundary is associated to a -back vowel that is adjacent to a +back
vowel, shown in bold and red. Thus the FSCs in
(\ref{fsc.turkish.nomorph}), without morpheme boundaries on feature
tiers, do capture the suffix harmony pattern in Turkish.

However, Turkish also has grammatical words with disharmonic roots. The
FSCs in (\ref{fsc.turkish.nomorph}) do not discriminate between root and
suffix vowel features because there is no morpheme boundary on the
feature tier. A grammatical Turkish root like {[}tatil{]} `vacation'
would violate (\ref{fsc.turkish.nomorph}a) when its AR is derived using
the graph primitive that includes morpheme boundaries only on the
segmental tier because the AR contains the forbidden structure shown in
bold and red in (\ref{turkish.tatil}a).

\begin{exe}
\ex{[tatil] `vacation'} \label{turkish.tatil} \\
  \begin{tikzpicture}[baseline=(current bounding box.north)]
  \matrix [matrix of nodes, row sep={3.45em,between origins}, column sep={3.25em,between origins}, nodes={text height=1em, text depth=0.5em}] 
  {
(a)     & |[red](1)| \textbf{+back} &         & |[red](2)| \textbf{-back} &         &               & \\ 
|(a)| t & |(b)| a                   & |(c)| t & |(d)| i                   & |(e)| l & |(6)| \LARGE+ & \\
(b)     & |(3)|  +back &         & |(4)| -back &         |(5)| \LARGE+ \\
|(f)| t & |(g)| a      & |(h)| t & |(i)| i     & |(j)| l & |(k)| \LARGE+ \\
  };
  \draw (1.south) -- (b.north);
  \draw (2.south) -- (d.north);
  \draw (3.south) -- (g.north);
  \draw (4.south) -- (i.north);
  \draw[red,thick,->] (1) -- (2);
  \draw[black,->] (3) -- (4);
  \draw[black,->] (4) -- (5);
  \draw[black,->] (a) -- (b);
  \draw[black,->] (b) -- (c);
  \draw[black,->] (c) -- (d);
  \draw[black,->] (d) -- (e);
  \draw[black,->] (e) -- (6);
  \draw[black,->] (f) -- (g);
  \draw[black,->] (g) -- (h);
  \draw[black,->] (h) -- (i);
  \draw[black,->] (i) -- (j);
  \draw[black,->] (j) -- (k);
  \end{tikzpicture}
\end{exe}

The AR in (\ref{turkish.tatil}b) introduces a new graph primitive that
includes the morpheme boundary on both the segmental and back tiers. It
also violates (\ref{fsc.turkish.nomorph}a), which thus forbids a
grammatical Turkish root. So the FSCs in (\ref{fsc.turkish.nomorph}) are
able to capture the Turkish suffix harmony pattern with morpheme
boundaries represented only on the segmental tier, but they are not able
to capture disharmonic roots in Turkish. Enriching the representation to
include a morpheme boundary in the set of representations that can occur
on the feature tier increases the expressive power of the AR such that
the two back features are distinguished as root features in
(\ref{turkish.tatil}b). Including the morpheme boundary on the back tier
thus prevents (\ref{turkish.tatil}b) from violating the FSCs posited for
Turkish in (\ref{fsc.turkishback}).

In summary, Turkish demonstrates the necessity of adding a morpheme
boundary `\textipa{\LARGE+}' to the set of representations that can
occur on a feature tier. Because all root and suffix vowels do not
necessarily have to share the same features on the surface it is
necessary to distinguish them from one another. Identifying whether a
vowel is part of a root or a suffix is accomplished by ordering the
vowels relative to a morpheme boundary. However, since vowels are also
ordered with respect to consonants, it is necessary to include an
ordering relation on feature tiers so that the FSCs are connected. The
morpheme boundaries are projected onto each feature tier so that vowel
features are ordered relative to the boundary and can thus be
distinguished as belonging to a root or a suffix. In this way, the
vowels are indirectly ordered relataive to each other via the ordering
between their features in addition to their association to those
features. Turkish vowel harmony can be considered local because both its
back and round harmony patterns are captured by the connected FSCs in
(\ref{fsc.turkishback}) and (\ref{fsc.turkishround}). These FSCs refer
to the associations between vowels and features as well as the ordering
relation between features and a morpheme boundary.

\subsection{Agreement vs.~Spreading}\label{agreement-vs.spreading}

Unlike Finnish, Turkish has suffix vowel harmony, but not root harmony
so the morphological domain of harmony must be restricted. The analysis
above adds a morpheme boundary to the set of representations that occur
on both the feature and segmental tiers. Including a primitive with
morpheme boundaries on both tiers increases the expressive power of ARs
such that the possible domain of feature spreading is restricted by
adjacency to a single morpheme, but feature assimilation between
morphemes still occurs. In Turkish, assimilation is thus more likely due
to agreement between root-final and suffix vowel features rather the
spreading that occured in Finnish. So, two different assimilation
mechanism have been discovered to generate vowel harmony patterns and
both can be captured using FSCs.

\section{Sour Grapes}\label{sour-grapes}

Another phenomenon often discussed in autosegmental spreading literature
is the unattested, but logically possible pattern called sour grapes
(Lamont, 2018; McCarthy, 2011; Padgett, 1995). Sour grapes spreading is
a pattern in which a feature, such as nasality in Lamont (2018), spreads
throughout a word; but, if the word contains a blocking segment, like
low vowels in Akan, no spreading occurs at all. Sour grapes blockers
could thus be considered to block spreading from any distance. Lamont
(2018) illustrates what a sour grapes pattern would look like with nasal
spreading below.

\begin{exe}
\ex{Long distance blocking of local spreading, e.g. with nasal harmony (copied from Lamont (2018))}\label{nsg} 
\begin{xlist}
  \ex /wawa/ $\mapsto$ [wawa]
  \ex /mawa/ $\mapsto$ \textipa{[m\~a\~w\~a]}
  \ex /awamawa/ $\mapsto$ \textipa{[awam\~a\~w\~a]}
  \ex /mawasa/ $\mapsto$ [mawasa]
  \ex /mawamawasa/ $\mapsto$ \textipa{[m\~a\~w\~amawasa]}
  \ex /mawasamawamawasamawamawasamawa/ $\mapsto$ \textipa{[mawasam\~a\~w\~amawasam\~a\~w\~amawasm\~a\~w\~a]}
\end{xlist}
\end{exe}

\noindent In (\ref{nsg}a-c) nasality spreads from an {[}m{]} onto each
segment to the right of it. In (\ref{nsg} d-f) an {[}s{]} is introduced,
which prevents nasality from spreading at all. In (\ref{nsg}e-f) it
becomes clear that {[}s{]} only blocks nasal spreading to its left, but
does not affect the rightward spread of nasality from {[}m{]} to the
right of {[}s{]}.

By representing nasality as two primitive autosegments (N for nasal and
O for oral) on a single autosegmental tier that is connected only to a
segmental tier, Lamont (2018) further shows that the nasal sour grapes
pattern over two-tiered ARs must be generated by a grammar that is more
expressive than ASL\textsuperscript{g\textsubscript{T}}. The nasal sour
grapes pattern does not meet the requirements for any of the subregular
classes of grammars that ASL\textsuperscript{g\textsubscript{T}} cuts
across and so Lamont (2018) posits that sour grapes must be generated by
a more expressive Regular grammar.

Following Lamont (2018), this section will evaluate the expressive power
needed to generate an unattested sour grapes pattern over multi-tiered
ARs. It will be shown that the expressive power of multi-tiered ARs is
significantly increased by enriching the representation because a sour
grapes vowel harmony pattern can be described by FSCs over multi-tiered
ARs if word boundaries are added to the set of representations allowed
on feature tiers.

\subsection{Sour grapes in vowel
harmony}\label{sour-grapes-in-vowel-harmony}

A parallel to the nasal sour grapes pattern can be drawn using the Akan
vowel harmony pattern discussed in section 2.1. In traditional
descriptions of Akan, an ATR feature is said to spread from an
underlyingly associated vowel onto all -low vowels to the right. For
example, the word \textipa{O}b\textipa{E}j\textipa{E}\textipa{I} `he
came and did it', shown in (\ref{sgak}a) and (\ref{akan.sg}a), is
grammatical in Akan. However, +low vowels block Akan vowel harmony, so
an Akan-like sour grapes word would have a +low vowel and the ATR
feature would not spread, as in (\ref{sgak}b) and (\ref{akan.sg}b). In
(\ref{akan.sg}) dashed lines represent an association via spreading and
solid lines represent an underlying association that is also present on
the surface.

\begin{exe}
\ex{ATR harmony with sour grapes}\label{sgak} 
\begin{xlist}
  \ex /\textipa{O}bejei/ $\mapsto$ [\textipa{O}b\textipa{E}j\textipa{E}\textipa{I}] `he came and did it'
  \ex /\textipa{O}bejea/ $\mapsto$ [\textipa{O}bejea]
\end{xlist}
\end{exe}

\begin{exe}
\ex{ATR harmony with sour grapes ARs}\label{akan.sg} \\
  \begin{tikzpicture}[baseline=(current bounding box.north)]
  \matrix [matrix of nodes, row sep={3.75em,between origins}, column sep={2.5em,between origins}, nodes={text height=1em, text depth=0.5em}] 
  {
(a) & |(a)| -ATR        &           &                   &           &                   &                        & (b) & |(b)| -ATR        &           & |(f)| +ATR &   &         & \\
    & |(1)| \textipa{O} & |(co1)| b & |(2)| \textipa{E} & |(co2)| j & |(3)| \textipa{E} & |(4)| \textipa{I} &     & |(5)| \textipa{O} & |(co3)| b & |(6)| e    & |(co4)| j & |(7)| e & |(8)| a \\
    & |(c)| -low        &           &                   &           &                   &                        &     & |(d)| -low        &           &            &           &         & |(e)| +low \\
  };
  \draw (a.south) -- (1.north);
  \draw[dashed] foreach \x in {2, 3, 4} {(a.south) -- (\x.north)};
  \draw (1.south) -- (c.north);
  \draw foreach \x in {2, 3, 4} {(\x.south) -- (c.north)};
  \draw foreach \x in {6, 7, 8} {(f.south) -- (\x.north)};
  \draw foreach \x in {5, 6, 7} {(\x.south) -- (d.north)};
  \draw (b.south) -- (5.north);
  \draw (8.south) -- (e.north);
  \draw[black,->] (b) -- (f);
  \draw[black,->] (1) -- (co1);
  \draw[black,->] (co1) -- (2);
  \draw[black,->] (2) -- (co2);
  \draw[black,->] (co2) -- (3);
  \draw[black,->] (3) -- (4);
  \draw[black,->] (5) -- (co3);
  \draw[black,->] (co3) -- (6);
  \draw[black,->] (6) -- (co4);
  \draw[black,->] (co4) -- (7);
  \draw[black,->] (7) -- (8);
  \draw[black,->] (d) -- (e);
  \end{tikzpicture}
\end{exe}

\noindent In (\ref{akan.sg}a) the -ATR feature spreads from the initial
-low vowel onto every -low vowel to the right. However, in
(\ref{akan.sg}b) the final +low vowel prevents the initial -ATR feature
from spreading. So each vowel maintains its underlying associations on
the surface and the -low vowels are each associated to one of two
different adjacent ATR features.

On the surface, a word in an Akan-like language with sour grapes
(L\textsubscript{SG}) can be distinguished from Akan
(L\textsubscript{A}) based on the grammaticality of certain ARs. Both
L\textsubscript{A} and L\textsubscript{SG} have words with full ATR and
low harmony, as in (\ref{sgexar}b). The difference between
L\textsubscript{A} and L\textsubscript{SG} is that L\textsubscript{SG}
allows words with different ATR features and a +low vowel, shown in
(\ref{sgexar}a). Neither L\textsubscript{A} nor L\textsubscript{SG}
allow words with different ATR features and full low harmony, as in
(\ref{sgexar}c). A grammar that generates L\textsubscript{SG} would thus
need to distinguish (\ref{sgexar}a) and (\ref{sgexar}b) from
(\ref{sgexar}c). In (\ref{sgexar}), the superscript `n' represents any
possible number of vowels that can occur in a given position with the
same featural associations.

\begin{exe}
\ex{Sour Grapes}\label{sgexar} \\
  \begin{tikzpicture}[baseline=(current bounding box.north)]
  \matrix [matrix of nodes, row sep={3.45em,between origins}, column sep={3.5em,between origins}, nodes={text height=1em, text depth=0.5em}]
{ 
(a) & |(1)| -ATR & |(2)| +ATR    & |(3)| -ATR &                 & (b) & |(4)| -ATR &              &         & \\
    & |(a)| V    & |(b)| V$^n$   & |(c)| V    & $\in$ L$_S$$_G$ &     & |(f)| V    & |(g)| V$^n$  & |(h)| V & $\in$ L$_S$$_G$ \\
    & |(d)| -low &             & |(e)| +low &                   &     & |(i)| -low      &              &        & \\
(c) & |(5)| -ATR & |(6)| +ATR    & |(7)| -ATR & \\
    & |(j)| V    & |(k)| V$^n$   & |(l)| V    & $\notin$ L$_S$$_G$ \\
    & |(m)| -low \\
};
  \draw (1.south) -- (a.north);
  \draw foreach \x in {a, b} {(\x.south) -- (d.north)};
  \draw (2.south) -- (b.north);
  \draw (3.south) -- (c.north);
  \draw (c.south) -- (e.north);
  \draw foreach \x in {f, g, h} {(4.south) -- (\x.north)};
  \draw foreach \x in {f, g, h} {(\x.south) -- (i.north)};
  \draw (5.south) -- (j.north);
  \draw (6.south) -- (k.north);
  \draw (7.south) -- (l.north);
  \draw foreach \x in {j, k, l} {(\x.south) -- (m.north)};
  \draw[black,->] (1) -- (2);
  \draw[black,->] (2) -- (3);
  \draw[black,->] (d) -- (e);
  \draw[black,->] (5) -- (6);
  \draw[black,->] (6) -- (7);
  \end{tikzpicture}
\end{exe}

So far, vowel harmony patterns with neutral vowels have been captured
using FSCs over multi-tiered ARs in which a feature on one tier can
affect what features are possible on another tier as long as they are
associated to the same vowel or connected by adjacency.
L\textsubscript{SG}, on the other hand, introduces the possibility that
any number of vowels between a -ATR and a +low vowel can be +ATR. An FSC
that forbids the presence of +ATR vowels without a +low vowel somewhere
in the word would also have to forbid a certain number of +ATR vowels,
which requires counting vowels for its evaluation. Alternatively,
existential quantification would allow a constraint to require the
presence of +G. Whether counting vowels in a word or using existential
quantification, such a constraint would make sour grapes more expressive
than the ASL\textsuperscript{g} class.

\newpage

\section{References}\label{references}

\setlength{\parindent}{-0.5in} \setlength{\leftskip}{0.5in}

\hypertarget{refs}{}
\hypertarget{ref-archangelipulleyblank1994}{}
Archangeli, D., \& Pulleyblank, D. (1994). \emph{Grounded phonology}
(Vol. 25). MIT Press.

\hypertarget{ref-Clements1976}{}
Clements, G. (1976). Vowel harmony in non-linear generative phonology:
An autosegmental model.

\hypertarget{ref-crothersshibatani1980}{}
Crothers, J., \& Shibatani, M. (1980). Issues in the description of
turkish vowel harmony. \emph{Issues in the Description of Turkish Vowel
Harmony}, 63--68.

\hypertarget{ref-Goldsmith1976}{}
Goldsmith, J. (1976). \emph{Autosegmental phonology} (PhD thesis).
Massachusetts Institute of Technology.

\hypertarget{ref-heinzidsardi2013}{}
Heinz, J., \& Idsardi, W. (2013). What complexity differences reveal
about domains in language. \emph{Topics in Cognitive Science},
\emph{5}(1), 111--131.

\hypertarget{ref-heinzetaltsl}{}
Heinz, J., Rawal, C., \& Tanner, H. G. (2011). Tier-based strictly local
constraints for phonology. In \emph{Proceedings of the 49th annual
meeting of the association for computational linguistics: Human language
technologies: Short papers} (Vol. 2). Association for Computational
Linguistics.

\hypertarget{ref-jardinediss}{}
Jardine, A. (2016). \emph{Locality and non-linear representations in
tonal phonology} (PhD thesis). University of Delaware.

\hypertarget{ref-jardinelocaltone}{}
Jardine, A. (2017). The local nature of tone association patterns.
\emph{Phonology}, \emph{34}(2), 385--405.

\hypertarget{ref-jardineexpressag}{}
Jardine, A. (2018). The expressivity of autosegmental grammars.

\hypertarget{ref-jardineheinz2015}{}
Jardine, A., \& Heinz, J. (2015). A concatenation operation to derive
autosegmental graphs. In \emph{Proceedings of the 14th annual meeting on
the mathematics of language (mol 2015)} (pp. 139--151). Chicago, USA:
Association for Computational Linguistics.

\hypertarget{ref-lamont2018}{}
Lamont, A. (2018). ms. University of Massachusetts Amherst.

\hypertarget{ref-leben1973}{}
Leben, W. (1973). \emph{Suprasegmental phonology} (PhD thesis).
Massachusetts Institute of Technology.

\hypertarget{ref-mccarthyfg1988}{}
McCarthy, J. (1988). Feature geometry and dependency: A review.
\emph{Phonetica}, \emph{38}. Retrieved from
\url{http://scholarworks.umass.edu/linguist_faculty_pubs/38}

\hypertarget{ref-mccarthy2011}{}
McCarthy, J. (2011). Autosegmental spreading in optimality theory. In
\emph{Tones and features} (Clements Memorial Volume., Vol. 27).
Retrieved from
\url{https://scholarworks.umass.edu/linguist_faculty_pubs/27}

\hypertarget{ref-Nevins2010}{}
Nevins, A. (2010). \emph{Locality in vowel harmony}. \emph{Linguistic
Inquiry Monographs} (Vol. 55). MIT Press.

\hypertarget{ref-odden1994}{}
Odden, D. (1994). Adjacency parameters in phonology. \emph{Language},
\emph{70}(2), 289--330.

\hypertarget{ref-padgett1995}{}
Padgett, J. (1995). Feature classes. In J. Beckman, S. Urbanczyk, \& L.
Walsh (Eds.), \emph{Papers in optimality theory} (Vol. 18, pp.
385--420).

\hypertarget{ref-padgett2002}{}
Padgett, J. (2002). Feature classes in phonology. \emph{Language},
\emph{78}(1), 81--110. Retrieved from
\url{http://www.jstor.org/stable/3086646}

\hypertarget{ref-princesmolensky1993}{}
Prince, A., \& Smolensky, P. (1993). \emph{Optimality theory: Constraint
interaction in generative grammar} (No. 2). Rutgers University Center
for Cognitive Science.

\hypertarget{ref-princesmolensky2004}{}
Prince, A., \& Smolensky, P. (2004). \emph{Optimality theory: Constraint
interaction in generative grammar}. Blackwell.

\hypertarget{ref-ringenheinamaki1999}{}
Ringen, C., \& Heinamaki, O. (1999). Variation in finnish vowel harmony:
An ot account. \emph{Natural Languge and Linguistic Theory}, \emph{17},
303--337.

\hypertarget{ref-ringenvago1998}{}
Ringen, C., \& Vago, R. (1998). Hungarian vowel harmony in optimality.
\emph{Phonology}, \emph{15}, 393--416.

\hypertarget{ref-rogerspullum2011}{}
Rogers, J., \& Pullum, G. (2011). Aural pattern recognition experiments
and the subregular hierarchy. \emph{Journal of Logic, Language, and
Information}, \emph{20}, 329--342.

\hypertarget{ref-rogersetal2013}{}
Rogers, J., Heinz, J., Fero, M., Hurst, J., Lambert, D., \& Wibel, S.
(2013). Cognitive and sub-regular complexity. \emph{Formal Grammar},
90--108.

\hypertarget{ref-sagey1986}{}
Sagey, E. (1986). \emph{The representation of features and relations in
non-linear phonology} (PhD thesis). Massachusetts Institute of
Technology.

\hypertarget{ref-vdHulst2017}{}
vanderHulst, H. (2017). A representational account of vowel harmony in
terms of variable elements and licensing. In \emph{Approaches to
hungarian} (Vol. 15). John Benjamins Publishing Company.

\hypertarget{ref-vdHulstSmith1986}{}
vanderHulst, H., \& Smith, N. (1986). On neutral vowels.

\hypertarget{ref-valimaablum1986}{}
Välimaa-Blum, R. (1986). Finnish vowel harmony as a prescriptive and
descriptive rule: An autosegmental account. In F. Marshall (Ed.),
\emph{Proceedings of the third eastern states conference on
linguistics}. University of Pittsburgh.

\hypertarget{ref-walker2010}{}
Walker, R. (2010). Nonmyopic harmony and the nature of derivations.
\emph{Linguistic Inquiry}, \emph{41}(1), 169--179.

\hypertarget{ref-walkeroroquen}{}
Walker, R. (2014a). Nonlocal trigger-target relations. \emph{Linguistic
Inquiry}, \emph{45}(3), 501--523.

\hypertarget{ref-walker2014}{}
Walker, R. (2014b). Surface correspondence and discrete harmony
triggers. In \emph{Proceedings of the annual meetings on phonology}.


\end{document}
